[THEME MUSIC]
RICHARD DOLAN: When I look
at the subject of UFOs,
I see a discrepancy
that has existed
for years and years and years.
And that discrepancy is
between the incredible amount
of data that is available
for anyone with eyes
to look at it,
showing that there
is a real tangible
phenomenon that behaves
in ways that are just not
explainable in any conventional
sense.
Combined with the
fact that there's
denial about this from
our official channels year
after year after year.
So you've got this
one situation where
thousands and actually
millions of people
encounter this phenomenon.
They see these objects,
they encounter something
that no one has the language
really for explaining.
But it's there, it's real, and
that includes military people.
And at the same time, there's
this culture of denial
that is just seep through
every pore of our being.
So that's the UFO cover-up,
that's the UFO secrecy.
And you know, I wonder how
many years are we going
to expect this to continue.
And I don't have the answer.
I don't know how many years.
We've going for
many years already.
A full human lifetime,
you know, since the 1940s.
And I don't think it
will last forever either.
But there was one
year, at least one year
where that secret very
nearly came crashing down
when I look back on it.
And this is long before I
was around in the world,
but the year 1952.
I think really can
qualify as a year
that this secret
seemed to be maybe
in danger of coming apart.
And to put it in
context, this was a year
where UFO sightings
in the United States,
particularly, went
right through the roof.
There was a quantity of
sightings that really had never
been achieved before
and would not be equal
until we get to the
era of the internet
where it becomes
very easy for people
just to report what they
see to websites and so on.
Nowadays, there are
10,000 or more reports
that you get in North
America alone that
go on to different websites.
But that's because it's easy,
that's because we have the web.
Back in 1952, there
was no internet
and it wasn't all that
easy for people simply
to report their UFO sightings.
And even so, there were over
1,500 UFO reports for the year.
It's quite a high number.
And in the month of July,
there were 536 UFO reports.
I mean, just amazing amount.
Edward Ruppelt, who ran
Project Blue Book at the time--
this was the Air Force's
official investigation
of UFOs--
he talked a lot
about the year 1952.
And you know, it was
really an amazing thing
because the sightings
became so intense.
They involved high level
people in the US military
and in the CIA.
He talked about it, a
lawn party in May of 1952
that was held at the home
of one of the highest
people in the CIA, where
everyone there apparently saw
this unbelievable
spectacular UFO.
And according to
Ruppelt, he said,
phone call from these
folks got quick results
and quick investigation.
And so what happened was in
the spring of 1952, two very,
very important aircraft left
from Southern California
on their way to Hawaii.
In one plane was the
Secretary of the Navy.
His name was Dan Kimball.
And in the other aircraft
was a very important
Navy Admiral Arthur Radford.
On their way out,
these two planes
were about 50 miles apart that
were over the Pacific Ocean,
and an object, an unknown
object came and circled around
both of those planes.
First was Kimball's
plane, and what
ended up happening was this
disk-shaped object zoomed up
to their plane, circled
around the plane
as it's flying a
couple of times,
and then zipped off
where 50 miles away, it
found the plane carrying
Admiral Arthur Radford where
it did the exact same thing.
Circled around a few
times, and then zip off.
This obviously concerned
Kimball and Radford,
and these are two of the top
people making policy for the US
Navy at the time.
After Kimball landed, he really
wanted to look into this,
was very interested in what the
Air Force was doing in terms
of its investigation of UFOs.
And from what we
learned through Keyhoe
who was talking to everyone
around these two men,
was that Kimball tried and
really did not successfully get
solid information
from the Air Force
as to what was going on with
their UFO investigation.
And he was definitely
of the opinion
that he wanted the US Navy to
have its own independent group
studying these UFOs.
I mean, the fact was
Navy personnel were often
kind of annoyed by--
if they would have a sighting
while on duty on their vessel,
frequently it turned out
that Air Force people
would be flown in and would
conduct this investigation,
which as you might imagine
angered or annoyed a lot
of the Navy personnel anyway.
Navy had a lot of pride.
They were a service of
very long standing--
Harris Kimball,
Secretary of the Navy,
wanting to have an
independent UFO research,
study organization
within the Navy.
But it doesn't look like it
happened as far as we can tell.
But the sighting
itself, that's a heck
of a sighting in my view.
The month of June was
even more intense in terms
of UFO sightings and Ruppelt
talks about this as well.
And in the middle
of that month, he
talked about a meeting that
took place within the Air Force
technical Intelligence Center
headed by a general named
John Sanford.
He's really interesting in my
view because what he describes
is kind of a situation
where some high level
officers within the
Air Force and Navy
are meeting together in this
office, and Ruppelt was there.
And they're talking
about all of these UFOs,
and like what do
we do about this?
What is the deal with
all of these UFOs?
And this is a very
high level meeting.
And Ruppelt describes how
one Air Force colonel who
was an aide to Sanford complains
that the Project Blue Book's
attitude seem to be biased
against the extraterrestrial
hypothesis.
And Ruppelt writes, he says,
after the colonel said this,
you could almost hear him
utter like a breath saying,
OK, now, I've said it.
In other words, making the
obvious statement that no one
would make.
But that meaning
according to Ruppelt
didn't really have any kind
of obvious conclusion to it,
and things continued.
And then July got
crazier than June.
July was the month with
more than 500 UFO sightings,
and here's Ruppelt in his
little office trying to process
all of these reports coming in.
Some of them as many as 30 per
day, just ridiculous amount
of reports for this small team
in 1952 to be able to handle.
He talked at one point about
how there were rumors floating
around about the Air Force being
prepared for an alien invasion.
And he wrote, he said, hey,
if you've been in our office
at the time, you'd have
thought the invasion was
already underway.
Kind of a funny statement
but also there's
a lot of dramatic truth to that.
The month culminated
in two weekends
in a row of really interesting
and inexplicable UFOs being
tracked over the nation's
capital in Washington DC.
An event that made the
headlines of major newspapers,
including The New
York Times, which
got the attention of
President Harry Truman
and got the attention
of Truman's Air Force
liaison, his aide,
Colonel Robert Landry
who talked to Ruppelt
about these sightings.
And because it was
such a big thing
it resulted in the Air Force
organizing its largest press
conference since the end
of the Second World War
here in July of 1952 where
General John Sanford goes
in front of the cameras, and
he's there telling the world
that these sightings
over the capital
were apparently caused by
bizarre weather phenomenon that
fooled the radar
operators and so forth.
It's interesting because
appearing with Sanford
at this press conference was
another general by the name
of Roger Ramey.
And Ramey, of
course, was the guy
who had been throwing cold
water over the Roswell
event five years earlier.
It was Ramey who
was photographed
famously with Captain Jesse
Marcel of the Roswell 509
bomber unit where
they were saying,
oh, it wasn't a
flying saucer, it
was just the weather balloon.
That was Ramey.
So Ramey, in other words, was
very experienced in handling
the UFO matter in
the public realm,
and undoubtedly, that is why
he was there with Sanford
for this particular
press conference.
But it was a really
interesting thing
because none of the really
dramatic moments that
had happened were of
course, allowed to come out
in that press conference.
The fact that the radar
operators during one
of the nights of
these UFO encounters
where they'd lock the press
out, they locked the media out
because as Ruppelt
wrote, they believed
that this was the night
when it would be undeniable
that these UFOs were real.
And they didn't want to
hamper their efforts.
They didn't want the press to
go talking about it immediately.
They just thought this is too
powerful, this is too much.
We're going to deal
with this on our own.
And indeed, the
sightings of that night
and of those two weekends
were powerful indeed.
But the press
conference did its job.
Sanford did not allow the
radar operators to talk.
He didn't allow anyone
with a different opinion
to say anything, and
so it was pretty easy
for him to control
that narrative.
But it was a
dramatic time indeed.
And the threat to UFO
secrecy didn't end there.
One of the top researchers
of the phenomenon back
in those days was
Donald Keyhoe, he
was retired Marine Corps major,
who was really by this time
deeply interested in all
of these reports of flying
saucers.
And Keyhoe was pretty
well connected.
And one of the things
that he was able to do
is to get friends
over in the Air
Force and other
military services
to clear certain UFO
reports just for him.
Kind of an amazing thing.
For the remainder of
1952, he apparently
got something like
50, close to 50 UFO
reports from the military
cleared just for him.
And he promptly wrote about it
in a book the very next year.
There was a story of
one Air Force general
named Kelly who said, how the
hell Keyhoe get these reports?
Until he was reformed,
none to his satisfaction
that they had been
properly cleared for him.
They were not leaked, they
were properly cleared.
So there was a lot of
information that came out.
It definitely went against
the official Air Force
and government line about UFOs.
But in the end, it turned
out the secrecy held.
Absolutely, it held.
What you see in retrospect
after all these years is
that it's almost
like a football game
where the truth-seekers are the
offense and the secret-keepers
are on the defense.
And every now and then they
can push the ball downfield,
but it turns out there's
a lot more territory where
those secret-keepers
can keep retreating,
and they're still able to
keep the main secret hidden
from us, which is that
this phenomenon belongs
to someone that is not us.
Whoever they are,
whatever they are,
they are beyond what we
have, what we're able to do.
And you know, honestly,
despite how much all of us, I
think all citizens of the
world really would believe
in the end of UFO secrecy.
I'm certainly someone who
believes in ending UFO secrecy.
But it's not hard to
see why the people
on the other side of that
would want to keep that secret.
If they believed that they
have no control over this,
if they believe that
there's a phenomenon,
that's beyond their
ability to deal with.
Then it's not difficult to see
that they would do everything
possible to keep that under
wraps, to keep that contained.
Aside from the fact that
very powerful interests
in this world, and I mean
the most powerful interests
in this world.
Those who control
our means of energy,
those who control our best
and most advanced technologies
might feel and might
believe that releasing
UFO-related technology
would be too
disruptive for their interests.
And if that were to
be the case with them,
they would never
voluntarily allow
the UFO secret to come out.
The petroleum
gravy train is very
lucrative for certain interests.
And control over
that resource is
for them far too
valuable to gamble away
just because the public
might have a right
to know about something better.
Because after all,
anyone can recognize
that a object that
can noiselessly
zip from one part of
the sky to another part
of the sky like that is
probably not using petroleum.
It's probably using something
better, something beyond.
So implicit within a
solution to the UFO
mystery is, well, a
post-petroleum civilization.
And it might not
happen overnight
after some kind of disclosure
but it will happen.
So it's a disruptive
thing and it's not
difficult to see the
motivations of those
who have the secrecy to keep
things the way they are.
But as I always like to say,
secrets can't last forever
and they are not the only
part of this equation.
There's you and me, and
there's the phenomenon itself.
And the fact that we
live in a society that
is moving now here in
the 21st century so fast
into this new future, no one
can really see it for sure,
but we know that it's going to
bring some changes for sure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]